World War I
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Date	28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918
(4 years, 3 months and 2 weeks)
Peace treaties
Location	

    Europe Middle East Africa Pacific Atlantic Mediterranean and Adriatic

Result	Allied Powers victory
See Aftermath of World War I
Territorial
changes	

    Formation of new countries in Europe and the Middle East, such as Yugoslavia, Weimar Germany, the Soviet Union, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Austria, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Turkey, Hejaz, and Yemen
    Restoration of Polish independence and establishment of the Second Polish Republic
    Transfer of German colonies and territories to other countries, partition of the Ottoman Empire, dissolution of Austria-Hungary

Belligerents
Allied Powers:

     France
     United Kingdom

 and its territories:

    Russia[a]
     Japan
     Italy (from 1915)
     United States
    (from 1917)

and others ...	Central Powers:

     Germany
     Austria-Hungary
     Ottoman Empire
     Bulgaria (from 1915)

and others ...
Commanders and leaders
Main Allied leaders:

    French Third Republic Raymond Poincaré
    United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland H. H. Asquith
    United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland David Lloyd George
    Russian Empire Nicholas II
    Kingdom of Italy Paolo Boselli
    United States Woodrow Wilson
    Empire of Japan Yoshihito

	Main Central leaders:

    German Empire Wilhelm II
    German Empire Paul von Hindenburg
    Austria-Hungary Franz Joseph I
    Ottoman Empire Mehmed V
    Kingdom of Bulgaria Ferdinand I

Casualties and losses

    Military dead:
    Over 5,525,000
    Civilian dead:
    Over 4,000,000
    Total dead:
    Over 9,000,000
    ...further details

	

    Military dead:
    Over 4,386,000
    Civilian dead:
    Over 3,700,000
    Total dead:
    Over 8,000,000
    ...further details


Theaters of World War I

World War I[j] or the First World War (28 July 1914 – 11 November 1918) was a global conflict fought between two coalitions: the Allies and the Central Powers. Fighting took place throughout Europe, the Middle East, Africa, the Pacific, and parts of Asia. One of the deadliest wars in history, it resulted in an estimated 9 million soldiers dead and 23 million wounded, plus another 5 million civilian deaths from various causes. Millions more died as a result of genocide, and the war was a major factor in the 1918 Spanish flu pandemic.

Increasing diplomatic tension between the European great powers reached a breaking point on 28 June 1914, when a Bosnian Serb named Gavrilo Princip assassinated Archduke Franz Ferdinand, heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne. Austria-Hungary held Serbia responsible, and declared war on 28 July. Russia came to Serbia's defence, and by 4 August, Germany, France, and Britain were drawn into the war, with the Ottoman Empire joining in November of that same year. Germany's strategy in 1914 was to first defeat France, then transfer forces to the Russian front. However, this failed, and by the end of 1914, the Western Front consisted of a continuous line of trenches stretching from the English Channel to Switzerland. The Eastern Front was more dynamic, but neither side could gain a decisive advantage, despite costly offensives. As the war expanded to more fronts, Bulgaria, Italy, Romania, Greece and others joined in from 1915 onward.

In early 1917, the United States entered the war on the side of the Allies, and later the same year, the Bolsheviks seized power in the Russian October Revolution, making peace with the Central Powers in early 1918. Germany launched an offensive in the west in March 1918, and despite initial success, it left the German Army exhausted and demoralised. A successful Allied counter-offensive later that year caused a collapse of the German frontline. By the end of 1918, Bulgaria, the Ottoman Empire and Austria-Hungary agreed to armistices with the Allies, leaving Germany isolated. Facing revolution at home and with his army on the verge of mutiny, Kaiser Wilhelm II abdicated on 9 November.

Fighting ended with the Armistice of 11 November 1918, while the subsequent Paris Peace Conference imposed various settlements on the defeated powers, notably the Treaty of Versailles. The dissolution of the Russian, German, Austro-Hungarian, and Ottoman Empires resulted in the creation of new independent states, including Poland, Finland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia. The inability to manage post-war instability contributed to the outbreak of World War II in September 1939. 